rfc(374): The jsii compiler to follow TypeScript versioning (#373)
aws/aws-cdk-rfcs: text/0374-jsii-modular.md

# Modular jsii

* **Original Author(s)**: @RomainMuller
* **Tracking Issue**: #374
* **API Bar Raiser**: @{BAR_RAISER_USER}

This RFC proposes to unlock (de-couple) the versions of all jsii packages
(i.e: compiler, code generators, runtimes, tools and libraries) in order to
enable introduction of new major versions of any of these packages without
necessarily incurring a new major version of all other packages.

In order to make it easier to operate with de-coupled package versions, this RFC
further proposes we break the [aws/jsii](https://github.com/aws/jsii) mono-repo
into multiple single-package repositories.

## Working Backwards

### Release Notes entry

```md
Future releases of the *jsii* package constellation will no longer follow an
all-at-once version increment strategy. Instead, each individual package will be
released under their own version line. It is hence no longer necessary to ensure
the version of all *jsii* packages in a product's dependency are aligned on the
exact same release. For example, it is now possible to have a dependency on the
`jsii` compiler at `4.3.0` while using `jsii-pacmak` at `1.35.0`, which

> previously would have led to a fatal error when executing `jsii-pacmak`.

Reviewer: There must be some version order requirement between the producer and consumer sides, no?

Specifically when the feature expects properties produced by the compiler.

*jsii* ecosystem:

- Each package of the constellation now has it's own, independent version
  number, and only gets a new release when a change was introduced;
- The `jsii` compiler now follows the `typescript`  compiler version number,
  allowing developers to easily leverage improvements in the *TypeScript*
  language and compiler performance;
- The `@jsii/spec` package guarantees all releases of packages in the
  constellation remain inter-operable going forward.

### Why should I use this feature?

The new versioning strategy allows developers to have greater control over the
*jsii* tools they use. It allows developers to benefit from improvements to the
*TypeScript* language (and compiler performance) faster, by allowing them to
upgrade their project on their own timeline - in the same way they would be able
to do for a "pure" *TypeScript* project.

Since all parts of the *jsii* constellation are inter-operable with all major
releases of the *jsii* packages, developers are able to opt into new and
improved code-generation features of `jsii-pacmak` on their own schedule (i.e:
when they release a new major version of their library) without requiring all

> their dependencies and dependents use the same version of `jsii-pacmak`.

Reviewer 2: Like... exact same version? Do we not check assembly version? How do we even check or validate what version of `pacmak` a dependency was generated with?

Or is `assembly version == jsii version` ? If so, then another "Why Not Just X" that should be addressed is "why not decouple assembly version from jsii version" ?

## Internal FAQ

### Why are we doing this?

We are doing this to reduce the friction involved in making major changes to any
of the *jsii* constellation of packages. This will allow breaking changes to be
introduced in parts of the ecosystem without bumping the major version of the
rest of packages.

> This will improve our pace of innovation, as we will hence be able to introduce

Reviewer: I agree with @rix0rrr. I'm missing the motivation.

a new major version of any part of the ecosystem wihtout necessarily requiring
all downstream consumers to migrate all at once.

For example, this allows the `jsii` compiler to be upgraded to a new release
line of `typescript` without forcing every downstream consumer to also accept
the syntax breaking changes at the same time. Instead, consumers will be free
to take on a new release line of `jsii` independently from their dependencies as
well as from their consumers.

Separating the mono-repository into multiple repositories will help ensure we
maintain backwards compatibility between individual packages, and reduce the

> risk of creating codependent packages (different repositories need to be
> released independenlty, so dependencies can only flow in an asyclic manner).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
risk of creating co-dependent packages (different repositories need to be
released independently, so dependencies can only flow in an acyclic manner).
```

> released independenlty, so dependencies can only flow in an asyclic manner).

Reviewer: Don't monorepos provide the same or some of these assurances? For eg, I believe you can't have cyclic dependencies within packages of a monorepo.

It's not clear to me (from the rfc) why coupling jsii versions and breaking off monorepo are related. 

By not breaking off the monorepo, some of the concerns you've listed in the next question can be avoided while still decoupling jsii release versions.

  purpose)
- `jsii`
- `jsii-pacmak`
- `jsii-rosetta`
- `@jsii/kernel` and `@jsii/runtime` (which could be combined into a single
  package)
- Each individual `@jsii/*-runtime` package (and related tests)

Those new repositories could be created within the `aws` GitHub organization, or
alternatively a new organization could be created (the `jsii` name is already in
use as a GitHub organization).

The second component of this RFC is changing the release strategy for the `jsii`
compiler so that it follows `typescript` version lines (`major.minor`), and
ensuring other downstream consumers of `.jsii` assemblies do not attempt to
enforce version consistency using the `jsiiVersion` field.

### Is this a breaking change?

This is not a breaking change in the traditional sense: all existing code will
continue to work with the current release lines of all packages in the
ecosystem. However, the new versioning strategy of `jsii` is a departure from
Semantic Versioning, which will be accompanied with a major version change (from
`1.x` to `4.3.x` - matching the current `typescript` release line). This is to
be noted in the release ntoes.

> ### What alternative solutions did you consider?

Reviewer 2: This section is discussing alternatives along different axes.

The first paragraph addresses a different "versioning" solution (so an altogether different approach to solving the problem) (fully decoupled versions vs linking major versions to CDK).

The second paragraph addresses, once we've picked fully decoupled versions, an **implementation** concern about how we will version the packages independently (monorepo vs multirepo).

Those concerns do not really belong at the same level. I would suggest making it more clear what aspect of the problem we're targeting when discussing these alternatives.

Reviewer: I like to add these as several appendices as "alternatives for <design/choice>" and discuss pros and cons there, and link them off from here.

An alternative to de-coupled versioning is to time breaking changes in the
*jsii* constellation with new major releases of the root consumer libraries
(`constructs`, `aws-cdk-lib`, ...), however this forgets to account for the
existence of other consumers of *jsii* which do not depend on these libraries,
and may hence not have the same drive to release a new major version at that
time. Additionally, such major releases are expected to be infrequent as they
represent a major burden on the community, meaning our ability to release
improvements to *jsii* packages would be severely limited.

It would also be possible to unlock versions in the mono-repository, in order to
allow each packages to include breaking changes when necessary. However, this
makes it all too easy to inadvertently break backwards compatibility, as it is
so tempting to introduce the fix for a breaking change in the same PR as the
breaking change itself. Using several repositories makes this much less likely.

> ### What are the drawbacks of this solution?

Reviewer: What about your current PR validation (and build?) process that uses GH actions? 
Any particular challenges in that area?
